Databases - SQL Server

Can be defined as the storage of inter related data that can be organised in such a fashion that the process of retrieving data is effective and efficient

Management System: A set of programs to access the data.
-An environment that is both convinient and efficient to use

Earlier database applications used to be built on top of the file system
 
Drawbacks : data redundancy and inconsistency
            difficulty in accessing data
            data isolation
            integrity problems
            concurrency problems
            security problems
            atomicity

Dbase III and IV
Foxbase / foxpro

Data Model :
  a collection of tools for describing
     - data
     - data relationships
     - data semantics
     - data constraints



HDBMS - Hierarchial database management system - Focus 4gl 
NDBMS - Network database management system
RDBMS - Relational database management
ORDBMS - support for multimedia and hypertext based databases

EF Codd - codds 12 rules
Chen - E R Diagrams (visual picture to depict the relations between various pieces of data)

 Data is organised as tables(relations) as rows and cols

-each column represents attributes (properties) viz. Name, address, zipcode, city
- all attributes put together in a relation are called as domain.
-number of columns/attributes is known as degree
-each row has values against the attributes 
- one row is called as a tuple
- no.of rows in a relation is known as cardinality
- number of 

Relating one entity with another using the concept of Primary key and foreign keys


Data Integrity in RDBMS (Integrity Constraints)
 - Entity Integrity - primary key
 - Domain Integrity - Datatype, length, defaults, nullable, checks etc
            null/not null, default, check
 - Rereferntial Integrity - Foreign Key

Relation Types : one-to -one
                 one to many
                 many to many

Primary Key : No duplicates and no Null values

Foreign key : Duplicates allowed, nulls are also allowed, can exists only when a primary key exists

//go to the search option in task bar and type run
it will give you atext box - type services.msc


Structured Query Lang (Sql)
5 components :
  1. DDL : Data Def. Lang ( Create, Drop, Alter,Truncate)
 2. DML : Data Manipulation Lang (Insert,Update,Delete)
  3. DQL : Data WQuery Lang. (Select)
 4. TCL: Transaction Control lang. (Rollback, Commit)
5. DCL:Data Control Lang. (Grant, Revoke)